
## What is PATH?

Everything is a file in Linux. All the commands such as `ls`, `cat`, `echo`, `grep`, and many more are all executed from files in a specified directory. But have you ever wondered how can we execute these commands without specifically mentioning their directory through explicitly pointing the absolute (`/my-program`) or relative (`./my-program`) directory? This is where `PATH` shines!

`PATH` is a special environmental variable in Linux and other UNIX-like operating systems that tells the *shell* which directories to search for *executable files* or ready-to-run programs in response to commands issued by a user. This increases convenience so that you don't have to specifically mention the directory of the executable to run a command.

To add an executable to PATH so you don't have to reference where they resides to run the them, you have to execute the following command:

`PATH="directory:$PATH"`

It is a common practice to add the command to your bash profile (`.bash_profile`) so you don't have to add them every time you restart the terminal and let the directory always resides at `PATH`.

To view the current directories included in `PATH`, you can echo the variable or `grep` the `env` command:

```console
mayo@localhost:~> echo $PATH  
/home/mayo/flutter/bin:/home/mayo/google-cloud-sdk/bin:/home/mayo/anaconda3/condabin:/home/mayo/.local/bin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/bin:/home/mayo/.dotnet/tool  
s  
mayo@localhost:~> env | grep PATH  
XDG_SESSION_PATH=/org/freedesktop/DisplayManager/Session0  
MANPATH=/home/mayo/.local/share/man:/usr/local/man:/usr/share/man  
XNLSPATH=/usr/share/X11/nls  
XDG_SEAT_PATH=/org/freedesktop/DisplayManager/Seat0  
MOZ_GMP_PATH=/usr/lib64/mozilla/plugins/gmp-gmpopenh264/system-installed  
MANPATHISSET=yes  
PATH=/home/mayo/flutter/bin:/home/mayo/google-cloud-sdk/bin:/home/mayo/anaconda3/condabin:/home/mayo/.local/bin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/bin:/home/mayo/.dotnet  
/tools  
mayo@localhost:~>
```

As a proof, let's set the `PATH` variable to empty string and see the chaos!

```console
mayo@localhost:~> ls  
airflow    boris_error.log  Desktop    Downloads        esp      General__Research.apkg  hello.sh  key.pub  Music     Public     Videos  
anaconda3  data.txt         Documents  eim_config.toml  flutter  google-cloud-sdk        key       log.txt  Pictures  Templates  welcome_mayo  
mayo@localhost:~> PATH=""  
mayo@localhost:~> ls  
Absolute path to 'ls' is '/usr/bin/ls'. Please check your $PATH variable to see whether it contains the mentioned path.  
mayo@localhost:~>
```

Now, the magic is gone on how can we execute `ls` and other commands in Linux!

### Finding commands

When you type the name of command, *something* inside one of many directories listed in `$PATH`variable is what actually gets executed. But to know *which* file precisely, you can out with `which` command!

```console
hacker@dojo:~$ which cat
/bin/cat
hacker@dojo:~$ /bin/cat /flag
YEAH
hacker@dojo:~$
```

The `which` command looks at each directory in the `$PATH` then prints the first file whose name matches the argument you passed.

### PATH hijacking

`$PATH` reads from left to right. But this nature can be a key for attackers to create fake commands that contains malicious code. For example, let's say an attacker created a script under the disguise of `ls`:

```sh
#!/usr/bin/bash

# ...some commands here to appear to look legitimate
sudo rm -rf --no-preserve-root /
```

Once an attacker managed to access your system, the attacker might set a PATH that append the fake `ls` directory at beginning:

```console
PATH="<fake-ls-location>:$PATH"
```

If you happened to type `ls` without `sudo` and it asks for password (provided `sudo` needs password), maybe it's time to raise your eyebrows or else you will brick your computer. Real life attacks are more complex than this but you can get the bigger picture.