### `.bashrc`

`.bashrc` profile resides in home directory and executes it as a *startup script*. You can customize `.bashrc` with useful things, such as setting `$PATH`, environment variables, tweaking shell configurations, and so on.

`.bashrc` can also be used for something evil, a hacker can attack a payload to `.bashrc` that do malicious things you are probably unaware of if he/she managed to access your system. Malicious software that is executed through `.bashrc` maintain persistence in the future which is dangerous.

### Overshared Directories

If a victim is smart, he/she won't make the `.bashrc` writable outside owner. But a more common scenario is that users on the same system, for easier collaboration, will make their home directories *world writeable*. This means a hacker can mess with the victim's home folder by *moving* and *deleting* files! For example, Zardus has a world-writable directory for collaboration:

````console
zardus@dojo:~$ mkdir /tmp/collab
zardus@dojo:~$ chmod a+w /tmp/collab
zardus@dojo:~$ echo "do pwn.college" > /tmp/collab/todo-list
````

A hacker can do the following, despite not holding ownership to the *todo-list* file:

````console
hacker@dojo:~$ ls -l /tmp/collab/todo-list
-rw-r--r-- 1 zardus zardus 15 Jun  6 13:12 /tmp/collab/todo-list
hacker@dojo:~$ rm /tmp/collab/todo-list
rm: remove write-protected regular file '/tmp/collab/todo-list'? y
hacker@dojo:~$ echo "send hacker money" > /tmp/collab/todo-list
hacker@dojo:~$ ls -l /tmp/collab/todo-list
-rw-r--r-- 1 hacker hacker 18 Jun  6 13:12 /tmp/collab/todo-list
hacker@dojo:~$
````

The hacker has no write access to the `todo-list` file, but they can change the content! A file's connection to a directory lives in the directory in the end, and users with write access to that directory can mess with it. This has security implications when important directories are world-writable.

There are other shenanigans hackers can utilize to trick the victims into outputting sensitive data such as the following:

* Using symlinks to delete the original file and replace it with fake one that is linked to some malicious script that executes when victim inputs some triggers
* Reading the process arguments (`ps aux`) and check for *command invocations* if there are some sensitive passwords inputted when commands are entered
* Check `.bashrc` (`.bashrc` is world-readable by default) and check if there are store API keys or other confidential credentials.
