
This module is all about Linux permissions, that is one of the most important parts of journey going ahead. In Linux, files have different permissions or file modes. Using `ls -l`, we can list the files and look at their permissions:

```bash
hacker@dojo:~$ mkdir pwn_directory
hacker@dojo:~$ touch college_file
hacker@dojo:~$ ls -l
total 4
-rw-r--r-- 1 hacker hacker    0 May 22 13:42 college_file
drwxr-xr-x 2 hacker hacker 4096 May 22 13:42 pwn_directory
hacker@dojo:~$
```

Let's look at the output at the high level:

#### File Type

The first character of each line refers to file type. In the `pwn_directory` case, `d` indicates that it is a directory. In `college_file`'s case, `-` represents it's a normal file. There are other types as well, that we are going to encounter the more we learn and get comfortable with Linux.

#### Permissions

The next nine characters are the actual permissions of the file or directory, split into 3 characters for every permissions:

- first 3 characters denotes the permissions that the user who owns the file (termed "owner") has to the file
- second 3 characters denotes permissions that the group that owns the file (termed "group") has to the file
- and last 3 characters denoting the permissions that all other access (e.g., by other users and other groups has to the file)

#### Ownership Information

There are two columns showing the *user* that owns the file (`hacker` in this case) and the group that owns the file (`hacker` in this case).

### Changing File Ownership

Every file in Linux is owned by the user on the system. On a shared system (such as computer lab), there might be many people with different user accounts, all with their own files in their own home directories. But even a non-shared system (such as your personal computer), Linux still has many "service" user accounts for different tasks.

Two most important user accounts are:
- Your user account. For example, in pwn.college, the `hacker` user is the user account
- `root` is the administrative account that is the ultimate prize most hackers dreamed of getting access to.

In pwn.college, `/flag` is owned by the `root` user, and is configured so that no one is permitted to read it except for `root`, try to `cat /flag as different user aside from `root:


```console
hacker@dojo:~$ ls -l /flag
-r-------- 1 root root 53 Jul  4 04:47 /flag
hacker@dojo:~$ cat /flag
cat: /flag: Permission denied
hacker@dojo:~$
```

`hacker` cannot read the contents of `/flag` because only root user can read it! If you `cat` it as the `root` user though:

```console
root@dojo:~# cat /flag
pwn.college{demo_flag}
root@dojo:~#
```

If you are a `root` user, since you own the `/flag` file, you can change the ownership of `/flag` file! To change the ownership of the file, use `chown`:

```
chown [username] [file]
```

Typically, `chown` can only be invoked by the `root` user. Let's pretend we are `root` again and use `chown`:

```console
root@dojo:~# mkdir pwn_directory
root@dojo:~# touch college_file
root@dojo:~# ls -l
total 4
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root    0 May 22 13:42 college_file
drwxr-xr-x 2 root root 4096 May 22 13:42 pwn_directory
root@dojo:~# chown hacker college_file
root@dojo:~# ls -l
total 4
-rw-r--r-- 1 hacker root    0 May 22 13:42 college_file
drwxr-xr-x 2 root   root 4096 May 22 13:42 pwn_directory
root@dojo:~#
```

`college_file`'s ownership has been changed to the `hacker` user. Now, `hacker` can do with it whatever the `root` had been able to do with it.

### Groups and Files

In Linux, files have both owning users and groups. A group can have multiple users, and a user can belong to multiple groups.

You can check what groups you are part of with `id` command:

```console
hacker@dojo:~$ id
uid=1000(hacker) gid=1000(hacker) groups=1000(hacker)
hacker@dojo:~$
```

In the above example, the `hacker` user is *only* in the `hacker` group. The most common usa-case for groups is to control access to different system resources. For example, you can be part of group that grants you root access to allow for better debugging and so on. Being in privileged mode in pwn.college allows you to have root access (being in `sudo` group):

```console
hacker@dojo:~$ id
uid=1000(hacker) gid=1000(hacker) groups=1000(hacker),27(sudo)
hacker@dojo:~$
```

A main user of a Linux desktop typically has a lot of groups such as the example below:

```console
zardus@yourcomputer:~$ id
uid=1000(zardus) gid=1000(zardus) groups=1000(zardus),24(cdrom),25(floppy),27(sudo),29(audio),30(dip),44(video),46(plugdev),100(users),106(netdev),114(bluetooth),117(lpadmin),120(scanner),995(docker)
zardus@yourcomputer:~$
```

Zardus can read CDs and floppy disks, administer the system, play music, and many more. This access control happens via group ownership on the filesystem! For example, graphical output can be done via the special `/dev/fb0` file:

```console
zardus@yourcomputer:~$ ls -l /dev/fb0
crw-rw---- 1 root video 29, 0 Jun 30 23:42 /dev/fb0
zardus@yourcomputer:~$
```

This file is a *character device* (indicated as type `c` in the `ls` output), and interacting with it results in changes to the display output (instead of changes to disk storage, or for a normal file). Zardus can interact with it because the file has a group ownership of `video`, and Zardus is a member of the `video` group.

In pwn.college, sometimes you cannot read the `/flag` file because you are not under the group `root`, and only members of group `root` can read the flag!

```console
hacker@dojo:~$ id
uid=1000(hacker) gid=1000(hacker) groups=1000(hacker)
hacker@dojo:~$ ls -l /flag
-r--r----- 1 root root 53 Jul  4 04:47 /flag
hacker@dojo:~$ cat /flag
cat: /flag: Permission denied
hacker@dojo:~$
```

If you are lucky, you can allow your group to access the flag file. In most cases, you need to have root access before you can do this. You can change the group ownership of file with `chgrp` command!

```console
root@dojo:~# mkdir pwn_directory
root@dojo:~# touch college_file
root@dojo:~# ls -l
total 4
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root    0 May 22 13:42 college_file
drwxr-xr-x 2 root root 4096 May 22 13:42 pwn_directory
root@dojo:~# chgrp hacker college_file
root@dojo:~# ls -l
total 4
-rw-r--r-- 1 root hacker    0 May 22 13:42 college_file
drwxr-xr-x 2 root root   4096 May 22 13:42 pwn_directory
root@dojo:~#
```

### Modifying file permissions with `chmod`

In pwn.college, `/flag` typically have the following permissions:

```console
hacker@dojo:~$ ls -l /flag
-r-------- 1 root root 53 Jul  4 04:47 /flag
hacker@dojo:~$
```

Well, how did we read it by `chgrp`ing to our groups? This made it possible by modifying the file permission! For these levels, the permissions are set like the following:

```console
hacker@dojo:~$ ls -l /flag
-r--r----- 1 root root 53 Jul  4 04:47 /flag
hacker@dojo:~$
```

Allowing the other groups to be able to read the flag!

Enter `chmod`. `chmod` allows you to modify the file permissions just like changing the ownership. The basic usage of chmod is:

```
chmod [OPTIONS] MODE FILE
```

You can either specify the `MODE` through modification of the existing permissions mode, or as a completely new mode to overwrite the old one.

In this level, we will cover the former: modifying an existing mode. `chmod` allows you to tweak permissions with the mode format of `WHO`+/-`WHAT`, where `WHO` is user/group/other and `WHAT` is read/write/execute. For example, to add _read_ access for the owning _user_, you would specify a mode of `u+r`. `w`rite and e`x`ecute access for the `g`roup and the `o`ther (or `a`ll the modes) are specified the same way. More examples:

- `u+r`, as above, adds read access to the user's permissions
- `g+wx` adds write and execute access to the group's permissions
- `o-w` _removes_ write access for other users
- `a-rwx` removes all permissions for the user, group, and world

So:

```console
root@dojo:~# mkdir pwn_directory
root@dojo:~# touch college_file
root@dojo:~# ls -l
total 4
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root    0 May 22 13:42 college_file
drwxr-xr-x 2 root root 4096 May 22 13:42 pwn_directory
root@dojo:~# chmod go-rwx *
root@dojo:~# ls -l
total 4
-rw------- 1 hacker root    0 May 22 13:42 college_file
drwx------ 2 root   root 4096 May 22 13:42 pwn_directory
root@dojo:~#
```

To overwrite permissions, use `=` instead of `+` or `-`. For example:

- `u=rw` sets read and write permissions for the user, and wipes the execute permission
- `o=x` sets only executable permissions for the world, wiping read and write
- `a=rwx` sets read, write, and executable permissions for the user, group, and world!

You can also chain permission modifications. For example, you want to set `rw` for the owning user, but only `r` for the owning group:

- `chmod u=rw,g=r /challenge/pwn` will set the user permissions to read and write, and the group permissions to read-only
- `chmod a=r,u=rw /challenge/pwn` will set the user permissions to read and write, and the group and world permissions to read-only

To zero out permissions, use `-`:

- `chmod u=rw,g=r,o=- /challenge/pwn` will set the user permissions to read and write, the group permissions to read-only, and the world permissions to nothing at all

Keep in mind, that `-` appearing after `=` is in a different context than if it appeared directly after the `u`, `g`, or `o` (in which case, it would cause specific bits to be removed, not everything)

### The SUID Bit

There are many real life cases where non-`root` users need elevated access to do certain system tasks. System admins can't give passwords every time users needed it to do an important tasks where `root` access is needed to do it. Instead of asking for passwords every time, "Set User ID (SUID)" permission bit allows the user to run a program as the owner of that program's file.

This is the underlying mechanism used to let challenge programs in pwn.college for you to read a flag. Outside pwn.college, SUID enable sysadmin tools such as `su`, `sudo`, and so on. Files with SUID permissions look like this:

```console
hacker@dojo:~$ ls -l /usr/bin/sudo
-rwsr-xr-x 1 root root 232416 Dec 1 11:45 /usr/bin/sudo
hacker@dojo:~$
```

The `s` part in place of executable bit means that the program is executable *with SUID*. This means that regardless of what user runs the program (as long as they have executable permissions), the program will execute as the owner user (which, in this case, is the `root` user).

If you are an owner of the file, you can set the file's SUID bit by using chmod:

```
chmod u+s [program]
```

Be careful! Giving the SUID bit to an executable owned by `root` can give attackers a possible attack vector to become `root`. 
