
### `screen` command

`screen` is a program that creates virtual terminals inside your terminal. It's like having multiple browser tabs, but for command line!

```console
hacker@dojo:~$ screen
```

That's it. You're now inside the screen session. It looks *exactly* like a terminal, but with new capabilities.

You can detach from your current screen, allowing your session to run in the background while you return to your normal terminal. You detach by pressing `Ctrl-A`, followed by `d` (for detach).

```console
hacker@dojo:~$ screen
[doing some work...]
[Press Ctrl-A, then d]
[detached from 12345.pts-0.hostname]
hacker@dojo:~$ 
```

To reattach, use `-r` argument to `screen` command:

```console
hacker@dojo:~$ screen -r
```

To list screen sessions (just like the browser tabs analogy), use `-ls` argument. You can see and find the session you want to reattach to.

```console
hacker@dojo:~$ screen -ls
There are screens on:
        23847.mysession   (Detached)
        23851.goodwork    (Detached)
        23855.morework    (Detached)
3 Sockets in /run/screen/S-hacker.
```

The identifiers of the sessions are the PID of each respective screen process, a dot, and the name of the screen session. To attach to a specific one, you use its name or its PID by giving it as an argument to `screen -r`

```console
hacker@dojo:~$ screen -r goodwork
```

To organize different tasks using `screen`, you can use different keyboard shortcuts. You always have to do `Ctrl-A` first before pressing shortcuts:

- `Ctrl-A c` - Create a new window
- `Ctrl-A n` - Next window
- `Ctrl-A p` - Previous window
- `Ctrl-A 0` through `Ctrl-A 9` - Jump directly to window 0-9
- `Ctrl-A "` - bring up a selection menu of all of the windows

### Using `tmux`

`tmux` is short for "terminal multiplexer". It is `screen`'s younger and more modern cousin. It does the same thing as `screen`, but with different bindings. The biggest difference though is `tmux` uses `Ctrl-B` instead of `Ctrl-A` when doing a command prefix.

To detach with `tmux`, use `Ctrl-B` followed by pressing `d`

```console
hacker@dojo:~$ tmux
[doing some work...]
[Press Ctrl-B, then d]
[detached (from session 0)]
hacker@dojo:~$ 
```

The following commands also differ:
- `tmux ls` - List sessions
- `tmux attach` or `tmux a` - Reattach to session

`tmux` also have the following shortcuts:

- `Ctrl-B c` - Create a new window
- `Ctrl-B n` - Next window
- `Ctrl-B p` - Previous window
- `Ctrl-B 0` through `Ctrl-B 9` - Jump to window 0-9
- `Ctrl-B w` - See a nice window picker

Tmux shows your windows at the bottom in a status bar that looks like:

```
[0] 0:bash* 1:bash
```

The `*` shows your current window, and each entry also shows the process that the window was created to run.