### Loading from memory

We already know the syntax for setting up a value to a register:

````asm
mov rdi, 31337
````

As you can see the value of `rdi` becomes 31337. Cool. But we can also use the same instruction to access memory! Instead of a raw value, we can use the second parameter as an address to access memory. Consider our memory looks like this:

````text
  Address │ Contents
+────────────────────+
│ 31337   │ 42       │
+────────────────────+
````

To access the memory contents at memory address 31337, we can do the following:

````asm
mov rdi, [31337]
````

`[<address>]` will treat the parameter as an *address* instead of a raw value. This means that the value is what resides on that particular address and put it into `rdi`. After the instruction executes, the value stored in `rdi` will be `42`!

### Dereferencing pointers

Let's say we have the following situation:

````text
    Address │ Contents
  +────────────────────+
┌▸│ 133700  │ 42       │
│ +────────────────────+
│
└────────────────────────┐
                         │
   Register │ Contents   │
  +────────────────────+ │
  │ rax     │ 133700   │─┘
  +────────────────────+
````

`rax` holds a value that corresponds with the address of the data that we want to load. Let's load it:

````asm
mov rdi, [rax]
````

Instead of specifying a fixed address like `133700`, we're using the value stored in `rax` as the memory address. This means that `rax` is a *pointer* that *points* to the data we want to access! This is called ***dereferencing*** the pointer. In the above example, we *dereference* `rax` to load the data it points to (the value `42` at address `133700`) into `rdi`.

By the above example, we can tell registers have a lot of uses. In fact, registers are *general purpose*! We can use `rax` as the syscall index for a program, but it can also serve as a pointer to a memory address containing a value.

Similarly, the data in the registers doesn't have implicit purpose. If `rax` contains the value `133700` and we write `mov rdi, [rax]`, the CPU uses the value as a memory address to dereference. But if we write `mov rdi, rax`, the CPU just happily puts `133700` into `rdi`. To the CPU, data is data and it is only differentiated when we used it in different ways.

You can even dereference yourself, nothing stops you from doing it! Assembly have a lot of shenanigans.

````asm
mov [133700], 42
mov rax, 133700  # after this, rax will be 133700
mov rax, [rax]   # after this, rax will be 42
````

### Using offsets when dereferencing

Pointers don't always point at the data you need. Sometimes a pointer references a collection of data (such as entire book). In such cases, you need to reference partway into this collection to get the data you need.

Let's say `rdi` points to a sequence of numbers in memory, as so:

````text
    Address │ Contents
  +────────────────────+
┌▸│ 133700  │ 50       │
│ │ 133701  │ 42       │
│ │ 133702  │ 99       │
│ │ 133703  │ 14       │
│ +────────────────────+
│
└────────────────────────┐
                         │
   Register │ Contents   │
  +────────────────────+ │
  │ rdi     │ 133700   │─┘
  +────────────────────+
````

If we want to access `42` (second number of sequence), we have to offset when dereferencing:

````asm
mov rax, [rdi+1]
````

This instructs like "go to address of `rdi`, and get the value *1 byte after memory address pointed to by `rdi`*". In memory terms, we call this 1 byte difference an *offset*. In the example, there is an offset of 1 from the address pointed by `rdi`.
