**Note:** I feel lazy, so most of the notes here are just copy pasted from pwn.college lectures.

### Disassembling Programs

In the previous module, you wrote assembly programs and built them into executables. But what if someone gives you a program and you want to understand what it does? This is where **disassembly** comes in: the process of converting the binary machine code in an executable *back* into human-readable assembly instructions.

Though you will learn to use vastly more powerful tooling later in your journey, we will start with one of the most common tools for disassembly: `objdump`. Given a binary, `objdump -d` will disassemble the executable sections and show you the assembly instructions:

````console
hacker@dojo:~$ objdump -d -M intel /tmp/your-program

/tmp/your-program:     file format elf64-x86-64


Disassembly of section .text:

0000000000401000 <_start>:
  401000:	48 c7 c7 39 05 00 00 	mov    rdi,0x539
  401007:	48 c7 c7 00 00 00 00 	mov    rdi,0
  40100e:	48 c7 c0 3c 00 00 00 	mov    rax,0x3c
  401015:	0f 05                	syscall
````

There are a few things to note here. First, by default, `objdump` uses the wrong assembly syntax, which is why we pass the `-M intel` option. Don't forget this option! Viewing assembly in non-Intel syntax can be confusing and harmful for your health.

Second, `objdump` displays the raw bytes of each instruction (e.g., the *hexadecimal* values `0f 05` is the `syscall` instruction) alongside the human-readable assembly. These are the actual values that are stored in computer memory to represent the instructions. For mathematical reasons, these are represented in "base 16" (hexadecimal) rather than the "base 10" (decimal) that we are used to counting with. If that does not make sense, please run through the first half or so of the [Dealing with Data](https://pwn.college/fundamentals/data-dealings) module and then come back here!

Third, the values that are being moved into registers are *also* represented as hexadecimal. This can make it slightly tricky to understand what the program is doing. Above, we can see that it is setting `rax` to the hexadecimal value `0x3c`, which is `60` in decimal and, thus, is our familiar syscall number of `exit`! Right before that, it sets `rdi` to `0`, which will be the exit code of the program.

But interestingly, right before *that*, it sets `rdi` to `0x539`, which we can't really observe from the outside because it's overwritten to `0` immediately. While this "secret" is benign, by reading the code of software, we can extract many different such secrets, some of which are security relevant!

### Tracing Syscalls

The first one is pretty simple: the **s**yscall **trace**r, `strace`.

Given a program to run, `strace` will use functionality of the Linux operating system to introspect and record every system call that the program invokes, and its result. For example, let's look at our program from the previous challenge:

````console
hacker@dojo:~$ strace /tmp/your-program
execve("/tmp/your-program", ["/tmp/your-program"], 0x7ffd48ae28b0 /* 53 vars */) = 0
exit(42)                                 = ?
+++ exited with 42 +++
hacker@dojo:~$
````

As you can see, `strace` reports what system calls are triggered, what parameters were passed to them, and what data they returned. The syntax used here for output is `system_call(parameter, parameter, parameter, ...)`. This syntax is borrowed from a programming language called C, but we don't have to worry about that yet. Just keep in mind how to read this specific syntax.

In this example, `strace` reports two system calls: the second is the `exit` system call that your program uses to request its own termination, and you can see the parameter you passed to it (42). The first is an `execve` system call. We'll learn about this system call later, but it's somewhat of a yin to `exit`'s yang: it starts a new program (in this case, `your-program`). It's not actually invoked by `your-program` in this case: its detection by `strace` is a weird artifact of how `strace` works, that we'll investigate later.

In the final line, you can see the result of `exit(42)`, which is that the program exits with an exit code of `42`!

Now, the `exit` syscall is easy to introspect without using `strace` --- after all, part of the point of `exit` is to give you an exit code that you can access. But other system calls are less visible. For example, the `alarm` system call (syscall number 37!) will set a timer in the operating system, and when that many seconds pass, Linux will terminate the program. The point of `alarm` is to, e.g., kill the program when it's frozen, but in this case, we'll use `alarm` to practice our `strace` snooping!

### Starting GDB

**GDB**, or **G**NU **D**e**b**ugger, is typically used to hunt down and understand bugs. A debugger is a tool that enables the close monitoring and introspection of another process. GDB is one of the most common debuggers in the Linux space.

To launch gdb, we can simply do the following:

````console
hacker@dojo:~$ gdb /path/to/binary/file
````

### Quitting GDB

Use the `quit` command to stop the GDB process:

````gdb
(gdb) quit
````

### Starting programs in GDB

Debuggers, such as gdb, observe the debugged program as *it runs* to expose information about its runtime behavior. When you launch gdb now, it will eventually bring up a command prompt, that looks like this:

````gdb
(gdb)
````

`starti` command **starts** the program at the *very first instruction*. Once the program is running, you can use other gdb commands to inspect its actual runtime state. We'll start with `disassemble` command. `disassemble` let's you disassemble the running code:

````gdb
(gdb) disassemble
Dump of assembler code for function main:
=> 0x0000000000401000 <+0>:     mov    rdi,0x539
   0x0000000000401007 <+7>:     mov    rdi,0x0
   0x000000000040100e <+14>:    mov    rax,0x3c
   0x0000000000401015 <+21>:    syscall
End of assembler dump.
````

### Stepping through instructions

Remember that `gdb` is a debugger. So what is the debugger capable of? Stepping on every instructions! To execute a single instruction in GDB, use `stepi` command: (**step** one instruction, also abbreviated `si`)

````gdb
(gdb) stepi
````

### Reading register values

After stepping on instructions, you might want to print the register latest value. The `print` command displays the value of an expression. Register names in GDB are prefixed with `$`, so you can read `rdi` like this:

````gdb
(gdb) print $rdi
$1 = 1337
````

### Examining memory

In the last level in pwn.college (upon writing this note), we could `stepi`/`si` to execute `pop rdi` and then print `$rdi` to read the secret. But what if there is no `pop` at all --- the program just exits immediately:

````text
mov    rdi,0x0
mov    rax,0x3c
syscall             <- exit(0) --- the secret was never read!
````

The secret is `argc`, which sits right on top of the stack, but the program never loads it into a register. So, you'll need to examine memory directly!

GDB's `x` (examine) command lets you look at the contents of memory. As we learned earlier, the stack pointer (`$rsp`) starts out pointing right at `agrc`, you we can read it with:

````text
x $rsp
````

### Examining stack pointers

We can now use `x` to read `argc` from the top of the stack. But the stack holds more than just `argc`!

Right after the argument count, the stack stores *pointers* to each program argument. These are *addresses* stored in memory: `$rsp+16` doesn't contain the argument text directly --- it contains the *address* where that text lives.

For example, if your program run as `/challenge/debug-me Hi`:

````text
     Address    в”Ӯ Contents
   +в”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җ+
   в”Ӯ  rsp + 0   в”Ӯ 2             в”Ӯв—Җв”Җв”Җ argc
   +в”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җ+
   в”Ӯ  rsp + 8   в”Ӯ 0x1234000     в”Ӯв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”җ
   +в”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җ+      в”Ӯ
   в”Ӯ  rsp + 16  в”Ӯ 0x1234560     в”Ӯв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”җ в”Ӯ
   +в”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җ+    в”Ӯ в”Ӯ
                                     в”Ӯ в”Ӯ
                                     в”Ӯ в”Ӯ
     Address    в”Ӯ Contents           в”Ӯ в”Ӯ
   +в”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җ+  в”Ӯ в”Ӯ
   в”Ӯ 0x1234000  в”Ӯ "/challenge/..."в”Ӯв—Җв”Җв”Ӯв”Җв”ҳ the program name
   +в”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җ+  в”Ӯ
   в”Ӯ ...        в”Ӯ ...                в”Ӯ
   +в”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җ+  в”Ӯ
   в”Ӯ 0x1234560  в”Ӯ "Hi"            в”Ӯв—Җв”Җв”ҳ   the first argument
   +в”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җв”Җ+
````

To get the actual argument data, we need to dereference *twice*: one to get the pointer from stack, and one to follow it to retrieve the string value.

Based on the program above, the "Hi" is passed as the first argument! We can use two `x` commands with different display mode to retrieve it:

**First:** we will need the *pointer* to the first argument.

````text
x/a $rsp+16
````

`/a` tells `x` to display the value as memory address, such as `0x7ffc001c4750`.

**Second:** Read the text of the first argument at the address:

````text
x/s 0x7ffc001c4750
````

`/s` tells `x` to display the value as a string.

### Cooperative debugging

So far, the debugging we've done has been **preemptive**: we started the program with `stepi`, which immediately forces the program to stop and let us debug it, without the program's awareness. But sometimes, the program decides when the debugger stop happens. We'll call this **cooperative** debugging.

On our now-familiar x86 architecture, the program can signal a desire to be debugged by using the `int3` instruction. If a debugger is attached when `int3` is executed, it stops the program. This is called a program **breakpoint**.

Before we can learn how to setup a breakpoint ourself, let's learn how to trigger the program's own breakpoint. To do this, rather than using `starti` to start the program and immediately stop it, we'll use gdb's `run` command, which simply runs the program until it hits a breakpoint (the `int3` execution)!

````asm
.intel_syntax noprefix
.global _start

_start:
mov rax, 60
mov rdi, 1337
int3
syscall
````

If we use gdb's `run` command on above program, the program will keep running until it encounters `int3`. Once it encounters a breakpoint, the logic of the program allows us to read the `rdi` register!

**NOTE:** When an `int3` is executed by a program *not* running under a debugger, you will see:

````console
hacker@dojo:~$ /tmp/your-program
Trace/breakpoint trap
hacker@dojo:~$
````

And the program will terminate... If you want the program to run outside a debugger, take out that `int3`!
