### Comparing Values

The `cmp` instruction is used to *compare* values. `cmp` compares two values by subtracting the second operand from the first. Crucially, `cmp` **doesn't store the result of the subtraction** anywhere you can see directly. Instead, it updates the CPU's internal flags based on what the result looked like.

For example

````asm
cmp rdi, 42
````

This internally computes `rdi - 42`, however, `rdi` is not modified. Instead, the CPU sets a special bit called **Zero Flag** (ZF): if the result of the subtraction is zero (equal values), the ZF will set to 1. So, if `rdi` is set to 42, then ZF becomes 1 since `42 - 42 = 0`. Otherwise, ZF becomes 0 since `rdi` is not set to 42.

So, how do we use this information? We cannot directly `mov` the flags into a register. Instead, x86 provides a family of "set on condition" instructions that write a `0` or `1` to a byte-sized destination based on the current flags.

One example is `setz` ("Set if Zero")

````asm
setz dil
````

This will check the zero flag and:

* If ZF = 1 (equal values), it writes `1` to `dil`.
* If ZF = 0 (the values are not equal), it writes `0` to `dil`.

In simple terms, 1 means yes and 0 means no. There's also a complementary instruction, `setnz` ("Set if Not Zero"), which does the opposite.

**Now, what is `dil`?** So far, we've worked with 64-bit registers like `rdi`, `rax`, and `rsp`. However, `setnz` instructions only writes single byte (8 bits). Luckily, we can access smaller portions of full 64-bit registers! For `rdi`:

* `rdi` is the full 64 bits
* `dil` is just the lowest 8 bits --- low byte of rdi

So, when you write `setz dil`, you are putting `0` or `1` into the lowest byte of `rdi`, and leave the upper bytes unchanged. Since `rdi` is the register used for the exit code in `exit` syscall, this effectively makes your exit code `1` (equal!) or `0` (not equal!).

One more thing about `cmp`: it can compare a register with an immediate (`cmp rdi, 42`) or even a memory location with an immediate (`cmp BYTE PTR [rsp], 42`). But it **cannot** compare two memory locations at once --- at most one operand can be a memory dereference. This is a general rule in x86 and, actually, in almost all CPU architectures.

### Comparing Characters

The syntax is almost the same when comparing characters in x86 assembly:

````asm
cmp BYTE PTR [rax], 'p'
````

Whatever string is stored in rax, the instruction above checks if the first character in `rax` equals to 'p'. `BYTE PTR` tells the CPU we are working with a single byte instead of a full 64-bit value. The instructions above compares one byte from the address in `rax` against the ASCII value of `'p'`.

### Conditional Control Flow

You can tell the assembly instruction to jump into different part of your code based on the result of `cmp`. The most useful conditional jump for our purpose is `jne` (**J**ump if **N**ot **E**qual).

````asm
cmp BYTE PTR [rax], 'p'
jne fail
````

If the values are *not* equal (ZF=0), the CPU jumps to the location labeled `fail`. The terminology used for this is that it "takes the branch" (in the road/code). If the values *were* equal, the CPU simply continues to the next instruction. The terminology used for this is behavior of *not* taking the branch that it "falls through" to the next instruction.

Under the hood, `jne` checks the Zero Flag (ZF) set by `cmp`. There's also `je` (**J**ump if **E**qual) that does the opposite: jumps when the values *are* equal.

What is `fail`? `fail` is a **label** --- a name you give to a location in your code. Label's do not generate any machine instructions; they just mark a spot that jump instrcutions can refer to. You define a label by writing its name followed by a colon:

````asm
fail:
  mov rdi, 1
  mov rax, 60
  syscall
````

The assembler resolves the label to an address, so `jne fail` becomes something like `jne <address>` in actual machine code. You can name labels almost anything you want. Though it is better to name them to describe what happens at that location.

With conditional jumps, our programs can now have two different *paths* of execution:

````
  [load and compare]
  jne fail          ← jump to fail if NOT equal

success:
  mov rdi, 0
  mov rax, 60
  syscall

fail:
  mov rdi, 1
  mov rax, 60
  syscall
````

If comparison succeeds (equal values), the program exits with `0` (standard success code). If comparison fails, the program exits with code `1` as per the `fail` label instruction.

### Comparing Strings

What if you want to compare strings instead of one character? It is pretty tedious, but you can do it like this!

````asm
mov rax, [rsp+16]       ; load argv[1] pointer

cmp BYTE PTR [rax], 'Y'
jne fail

cmp BYTE PTR [rax+1], 'E'
jne fail

cmp BYTE PTR [rax+2], 'S'
jne fail
````

Since strings are stored as contiguous bytes in memory, `[rax]` is the first character, `[rax+1]` is the second character, `[rax+2]` is the third character, and so on. The instructions above checks every character sequentially and if one of them fail, the string stops the instruction execution and immediately jumps to the `fail` label.

This is how many string comparisons work at the lowest level: compare byte by byte, bail out on the first mismatch.
